# Week 6 - Quantum Dots

> **Anonymous Code**: 58648
> **Date**: 5th November 2025
> **Speaker**: Dr Matthew Booth

Imagine that could have an invisible tattoo that stores information readable by your standard smartphone - this might sound like science fiction, but it's just one of the many applications of something that researchers at MIT have developed: quantum dots.

How is it possible, though? What even is a quantum dot? The first is a bit complicated, so let's start with the latter. Quantum dots are something called "semi-conductor crystals", measuring roughly one-thousandth the width of a human hair - absolutely tiny! In fact, so small that the physics we learned in high school no longer works, and we have to use something called "quantum mechanics" instead, hence the name. This makes them harder to work with, but gives them properties that are otherwise impossible with bigger materials. For example, when illuminated, these nanocrystals emit brilliant, pure crystals based just on their size.

Now back to the first question - how is this possible? The physics is a bit complicated, so let's use something less complicated: a jack-in-the-box. When you press down on the box and then let go, the jack springs out. For a really big jack-in-the-box, it doesn't jump out that quickly, but with a smaller one then it'll spring out super quick. In our quantum dots, the box is just a crystal, whilst the jack is something called an exciton - a bound electron-hole pair. A smaller shrinking crystal will have more energy than a larger one! Since light is actually just energy, this changes their colour; smaller quantum dots emit bluer light and larger ones emit redder light.

Traditional dyes do basically the same thing, though, apart from a critical difference: dyes absorb and emit at similar wavelengths (colours/energy levels), while quantum dots absorb all across the spectrum and only emit narrowly. This enables "multiplexed imaging" - illuminating multiple coloured quantum dots with a single ultraviolet source, and otherwise they remain invisible!

For imaging cells, this matters much more than you'd think. As Dr Matthew Booth explains in his lecture, "if you want to see how different parts of the cell interact, quantum dots enable this.", as traditional dyes require separate wavelengths for each colour, creating interference between them which complicates analysis, just like shining lots of different coloured lights in one spot will make it more difficult to see which colours are being shone. Another bonus is that quantum dots, unlike traditional dyes, can withstand thousands of cycles without degradation, maintaining detectability for far longer.

To apply these quantum dots further, they can be coated with targeting molecules such as antibodies. Cancer researchers are exploiting this by engineering quantum dots that only bind to tumour cells, so that surgeons can have real-time visualisation of cancers under appropriate lighting for longer duration and deeper depths compared to traditional dye. They can even be used to treat the cancer itself, with fewer side effects than conventional radiotherapy, using "photothermal cancer therapy"; quantum dots with tumor-targeting antibodies that absorb light and convert it to heat, destroying cancer cells but avoiding healthy tissue.

Despite all of these uses, and even more unmentioned, quantum dots do raise important safety concerns that you may have even thought of. Nanotoxicity - the biological effects of these tiny, nanoscale, materials - remains not very understood. Lots of different properties influence the behaviour of nanomaterials, and early quantum dots even contained highly toxic elements like cadmium and lead. Strategies can be imposed to minimise exposure, but some studies reveal unclear long-term consequences. As Dr Matthew Booth emphasizes in his lecture, "for new types of nanomaterials, it is important to carefully assess nanotoxicity… there are many more considerations when thinking about toxicity at the nanoscale."