# MTH3011: Advanced Project and Communication

> [!quote] Fabien Paillusson
> Here is a bit of blah blah

## Course Components

- **Communication** (35%): Coursework (Seminar Reviews) and Presentation
- **Project** (65%): Planning/Logbook and Report/Viva

## Learning Outcomes

- [ ] **LO1**: Undertake an independent programme of work in mathematics and/or physics aligned with the course subject specialism, that includes the analysis, interpretation, and critical evaluation of the results to reach conclusions that are appropriate for the particular project.
- [ ] **LO2**: Write a full and clear report that conforms to pre-agreed guidelines.
- [ ] **LO3**: Manage time, setting, and achieving appropriate targets throughout the project, including the provision of any necessary documentation, so that the work is completed by the stated deadline.
- [ ] **LO4**: Present and defend the results of the project in a viva.
- [ ] **LO5**: Critically apply concepts and laws from physics and/or mathematics to evaluate the scientific content of a research work.
- [ ] **LO6**: Demonstrate awareness of current themes of research in mathematics and physics by communicating in a style accessible to a lay audience on material delivered in a series of research seminars.
- [ ] **LO7**: Demonstrate awareness of modern research practices by presenting a critical review of a research paper in the form of a short seminar presentation.

## Lectures

- [[mth3011 lecture one.pdf|Original lecture notes 1]] -> [[mth3011 lecture notes one.pdf|Original lecture notes 2]] -> Populated this index note.

## Project

### Project Management

#### Research Plan (drafted by 22/10/2025)

- Project title
- Project description
- Project connection with previous studies/experience
- Literature survey: a list of (reasonably) all published material relevant to the project
- Reference list
- Equipment/facilities required
- Predicted consumables cost
- Action plan - actions and deadlines (*e.g. Gantt chart*)
- [Ethics document](https://ethicsapply.lincoln.ac.uk/)
- Risk assessment if appropriate
- Supervision discussion arrangements

#### Logbook of Meetings (22/05/2026)

- 30 minutes every two weeks, fully planned.

### Report (drafted by 01/05/2025, Completed by 22/05/2026)

- Content…
	- Title page
	- Abstract (max 150 words)
	- Table of contents
	- Introduction
	- Method section
	- Results/calculations/simulations, etc.
	- Discussion
	- Conclusion
	- Acknowledgements
	- References (<30% online)
	- Appendix (incl. Research plan)
	- *Referenced figures throughout the text*
	- *Around 10,000 words depending on the project, maximum of 20,000*
- Formatting…
	- Times New Roman suggested font (just be consistent, though)
	- Chapter headings font size 16 bold
	- Section headings font size 14 bold
	- Body text font size 12
	- Top/bottom margins of 1 inch, right/left margins of 1.25 inches.
	- Justify on left/right margins with 1.5 spacing
	- Headers/footers as appropriate, incl. page numbers in the footer (bottom center/right)
	- Check spelling
	- *Check if it's the standard of a published paper by comparing against the papers in the literature review*

### Viva (week Commencing 25/05/2026)

- Test subject knowledge
- Confirm individuality and understanding
- 30 minutes total:
	- 2-3 minutes short general intro at non-scientific audience
	- Max 12 minutes presentation of main results
	- Remaining 15 minutes in audience discussion answering questions
