Sphere packings



Anonymous code: 26742 





Sphere packings - Dr Fabien 8/10/25



Ever wondered what the best way to pack spheres in a container? Well it turns out that hexagonally packing them is the most optimum. Famously this was known as the Kepler conjecture, originally stated in 1611, and was later proved by exhaustion in 1998 by Hales and Ferguson. It was shown that hexagonal packing in 3D has a density of 32 (pi / 3 root 2 because unicode does not work) or roughly 0.74. This packing density means that roughly 74% of the space is actually taken up by the objects meaning that 26% of the space is unoccupied.



But what if you don't want to spend the time organising the spheres? Well it turns out there is a best way to randomly place spheres in a container, simulations in the presentation show that tapping vertically on the container can increase the packing efficiency of spheres when dropped randomly into the container. Scott, Nature 188, 908 Found that when tapping vertically the packing efficiency approaches but does not exceed 0.64. The study also says it's “unlikely that there are other stable random packing arrangements for equal spheres which have packing densities outside these limits”, referring to the random packing density not exceeding 0.64.



Yu et al., PRL 97, 265501 found that the limit of tapping horizontally on the container can actually increase the packing efficiency above the previously shown limit of 0.64.This method however cannot beat the hexagonal packing shown earlier. Calixtro Yanqui “An average model for disordered sphere packings” states that random packing could even approach 0.72 when “pouring the spheres layer by layer into a box subjected to horizontal vibration”. 



In conclusion if you want to pack spheres into a cylinder without spending a large amount of time and effort you should tap lightly on the side of the cylinder to improve the efficiency of the packing.