Stacking fruit and storing cereal may not seem complex, but the research that governs these was started centuries ago and there is still much up for debate to this day. The topic in question here is sphere packing and, although it was first discussed by Kepler in 1611, it has no lack of applications in a more modern world. This is the subject of Fabien Paillusson’s lecture ‘Inquiry into the packing of spheres’ on the 8th of October 2025 – the basis of this blog.



The first question was finding the ideal way to store spheres. When this was proposed this was about transporting cannonballs as efficiently as possible (but feel free to sub in your favourite sphere). The correct solution was proposed when the problem was written in the early 17th century and is the likely the way you’d intuitively stack spherical objects if you were tasked with such a problem. However, this was only proven in 1998 by Thomas Hales by which point Kepler had, some would say unsurprisingly, passed away. A note of mild interest is that there are infinitely many different ways to arrive at this optimal packing in 3D. Starting by arranging the first layer in a hexagonal pattern, further layers can be formed by placing spheres in the depressions created between the others on the layer beneath. When doing this you can either choose to repeat the pattern every 2 or 3 layers, or you can mix and match giving rise to infinitely many unique arrangements. You can also start with a square grid on the first layer, which might seem less like a looser packing, but creating further layers in a similar way actually leads to the same arrangement as the 3-layer repeating hexagonal one – albeit rotated [1]. Any of these will grant you an optimal ~74% of space filled by the spheres.



That’s well and good but, as nice as the that regular arrangement is, it’s not always practical to achieve it – or possible at all. Noone is going to arrange their (approximately spherical) grains of flour or salt in a nice regular pattern to reduce the amount of space they take up in the cupboard (Maltesers were Fabien’s spherical food of choice during the lecture, but should you want to try this practically I suspect the volume they occupy would decrease on their own). If you don’t want to arrange the spheres manually, the best you can do is tap the container against some other surface. This has the effect of closing some of the empty space inside by breaking so-called bridges. This is also something you’d probably intuitively do, but how close does it get the the optimal 74%? For a while many papers based on both computer simulations and practical experiments seemed to suggest that the limit was around 64% [2][3], but doubt was cast on this as densities of 66% became possible if horizontal vibrations were introduced as well. It might not surprise you that ‘random’ is not necessarily an easy thing to define. Are these results a limit for a particular set-up rather than a geometric law? Does vibrating the spheres inherently reduce the randomness of them? These questions spawned a paper in 2000 suggesting that no one had really put together a formal explanation for what a random packing of spheres was.



All of that is to say that we still don’t have a firm answer on either the best way to compact a random arrangement of spheres, nor the maximum density of such an arrangement. However, for everyday purposes at least, somewhere in the mid 60s is plenty close enough to 74 for me. So, you’ll find me continuing to tap my containers of salt and spices against the table to try and get the last bit in. I might even throw in a sharp sideways shake in for fun (with the lid on of course).



[1]

N. J. A. Sloane, “The Packing of Spheres,” vol. 250, no. 1, 1984, [Online]. Available: https://www.jstor.org/stable/24969283

[2]

G. D. Scott and D. M. Kilgour, “The density of random close packing of spheres,” vol. 2, no. 6, June 1969, doi: 10.1088/0022-3727/2/6/311.

[3]

W. S. Jodrey and E. M. Tory, “Computer simulation of close random packing of equal spheres,” vol. 32, no. 4, Oct. 1985.