The Packing Properties of spheres
by Fabien Paillusson
08/10/2025


Ever struggled to fit all your coffee beans in a jar or level out ingredients in a cup when baking? It turns out that this everyday frustration links directly to a fascinating problem in Mathematics.

Fabien Paillusson first introduced the packing fraction (﻿eta equals N subscript v over V﻿) which describes how much space is actually filled by a material inside a container. The discussion then led to reveal that hexagonal arrangements are the most effective in both 2D and 3D planes proved by The Kepler Conjecture in 2017 [1].



A common way to make a substance more compact in its jar is to tap the sides of the container. But a shocking fact mentioned by Fabien Paillusson in the 2006 study by Yu et al [2] reveals that only tapping the sides of a container is much more effective than tapping the bottom! Fabien further described that gentle vibrations of a container result in a higher density than harder vibrations, and that harder taps can actually decrease the packing fraction from findings in a study by Mueggenburg in 2012 [3].



Fabien then outlined the historical development of this timeless problem and mentioned a Scott, Nature study in 1960 [4] provided one of the earliest papers and used extrapolation in his findings. He then left us pondered, describing how randomness is not really random – its just events that happen with some probability and that there’s no such thing as perfect packing…

 

[1] Hales, T. (2005). A proof of the Kepler conjecture. Annals of Mathematics, 162(3), pp.1065–1185. doi:https://doi.org/10.4007/annals.2005.162.1065.

[2] Yu, A. B., & Hall, J. S. Packing of fine powders subjected to tapping. Powder Technology, 78(3), 247-256. https://doi.org/10.1016/0032-5910(93)02790-H

[3] Mueggenburg, N. (2012). Granular compaction under confinement. Physical Review E, 85(4). doi:https://doi.org/10.1103/physreve.85.041305.

[4] SCOTT, G. Packing of Spheres: Packing of Equal Spheres. Nature 188, 908–909 (1960). https://doi.org/10.1038/188908a0