---
scrybble_filename: Rough Notes
scrybble_timestamp: 1770204821
---
# Rough Notes

> [!WARNING] **Do not modify** this file
> This file is automatically generated by Scrybble and will be overwritten whenever this file in synchronized.
> Treat it as a reference.

## Pages

### [[Rough Notes.pdf#page=1|Rough Notes, page 1]]

#### Typed text

##### Lecture One

Have to internalise theories before using them - group theories from the start.
- A subsection/topic is one page of lecture notes - three a week. There are then handouts with more examples and proofs, and exercises to be completed in practical sessions /after lectures before the following week.
- _*I forgot how much this guy yaps* - don't do daily games before his lectures, do them during >:)_
- IT HAS BEEN TWENTY MINUTES WITH NO CONTENT AHHHHHHHHH
- Nevermind love this guy, _waggle waggle_
- Just realised Dan does way more work when it's his supervisor doing the lecture; wild.
- **Assessment Weighting:** Portfolio (at-home/in-class assessments 1:3 split) 40% / Final Exam 60%
- ****1.1. Introduction to Permutations
- **Permutation**: re-arranging a set; a bijection (injective & surjective, one-to-one & onto). Just a complete unique map of one set to another set.
- The set (group) of all permutations of a set, X, is Sym(x). If X is just {1,2,3,...,n}, we write S_n by convention instead.
- The modulus of these sets (S_n), |S_n|, is n! - initially n choices, but then just n-1 choices moving an element down, then n-2 choices through the next, etc.
- For finite x, |Sym(x)|=|x|! - proven inductively like on the left, for the previous argument.
- Considering a specific example of the former, S_7, for example an permutation sigma within this set (see to the right) we can find a three distinct cycles.
- These permutations always decompose into cycles, which can simplify our notation a bit: (1)(2 4 3 6 7)(5) - the three cycles with their elements, in order, and can be read as something repeatable within a bracket.
- By convention, we exclude one-cycles, like the aforementioned (1) or (5) - single element cycles.
- Hence for our example, sigma would be (2 4 3 6 7) in S_7 and excluded numbers are "fixed" (one cycles).
- _Whenever he says six-seven I get naam flashbacks_
- Another more complex example (see left) exemplifies the usefulness of the new notation.
- NOTE: within permutations it's left -> right, but when they're written next to each other then you operate BETWEEN permutations right -> left. (maybe?? idk he keeps saying he'll go back to it, adhd ahh guy)
- **NOTATION NOTE**: We write sigma x instead of sigma(x) to separate it from the bijection notation.
- **FORMAL PERMUTATION DEFINITION**: Let a_1, a_2, ..., a_r be distinct elements of a set X. Then sigma = (a_1, a_2, ..., a_r) is the permutation of X sending a_1 -> a_2, a_2->a_3, ..., a_r->a_1, and fixing everything in X | {x_1,a_2,...,a_r}. This sigma is called a **cycle of length r**.
- _These notes are gonna be annoying to sort, he's so all over the place grr_
- __**Pairwise Disjoint Definition**: A collection of cycles in Sym(x) is disjoint (NOTHING IN COMMON) if no element in X appears in two or more of them.
- For example, cycles (1 2 3) and (4 7 5) are disjoint, but not (1 2 3) and (4 3 7 5).
- **Uh oh controversial remark (APPARENTLY VERY IMPORTANT): **(1 2 3) and (3 1 2) are identical. YEAH DUH NOT VERY CONTROVERSIAL - just start with lowest num by convention to make comparison easier.
- 1.2. Products of Permutations
- **Definition**: Let sigma and rho be permutations of a set X. The product sigma rho means (see right). Essentially, work right -> left, sort of like functions: sin cos 30 -> sin(cos 30).
- This definition is by convention which conflicts between academics - **look into this (!!)**
- _"it's definitely easier to see more do it because I'll waffle" - yeah we know bucko_
- oh it's just like sigma(rho(1 2 3 4 5 ... N)) where N is from S_N, work within cycles too to make it easier
- like sigma=(1 2 3) and rho = (1 5 3 4) in S_6, given sigma rho, becomes: sigma rho 1 = sigma 5 = 5 sigma rho 5 = sigma 3 = 1 sigma rho 1 = sigma 5 = 5 CYCLE: (1 5)
- Then keep going for the next cycle(s), now starting at 2... sigma rho 2 = 3 sigma rho 3 = 4 sigma rho 4 = 2 sigma rho 2 = 3 CYCLE: (2 3 4)
- Then the last one is (6), fixed, so the final answer is: sigma rho = (1 5)(2 3 4)(6).
- Like composing functions - light work.
- _ew I just realised he writes tau really weird_
- Another example, sigma = (1 2), rho = (2 3), tau = (3 5)... sigma rho tau 1 = (1 2)(2 3)(3 5) 1 = 2 - feeding the number through the cycles right -> left sigma rho tau 2 = (1 2)(2 3)(3 5) 2 = 3 sigma rho tau 3 = (1 2)(2 3)(3 5) 3 = 5 sigma rho tau 5 = (1 2)(2 3)(3 5) 5 = 1 CYCLE: (1 2 3 5)
- Hence (1 2 3 5)(4).
- YET ANOTHER EXAMPLE: (3 5)(2 4 6 8)(2 3 4) = ? (1)(2 5 3 6 8)(4)(7) - directly found by plugging in numbers in mah head.
- Is kinda like simplifying permuations?
- YIPPEEEEE IT'S OVER >:)))))))


### [[Rough Notes.pdf#page=2|Rough Notes, page 2]]

#### Typed text

##### Lecture 2 - Theory & Practical
- **Commutativity**: Permutation multiplication is not commutative, i.e., xy != yx. Essentially like the composition of matrices, where each permutation is a function/bijective mapping. _Exception: Disjoint cycles ARE commutative, since they don't affect each other at all._
- **Inverses**: Apply inverses to the right, as with our new normal convention right -> left order of operations, e.g. sigma rho = tau phi -> sigma = tau phi rho inverse.
- **Freaky Proposition (recap)**: If sigma & rho are disjoint then sigma rho = rho sigma, otherwise not equal.
- _My mcdon is getting cold, pls hurry up to questions Mr. Simon :(_
- Section 1.3. Properties of Permutations
- **FREAKIER Proposition**: Products of permutations are associative; just composition of functions.
- Identity permuation, e (or 1, Id, 0, I, among others), in Sym(X) is the bijection that sends x to x for all x in X; self-mapping, e.g. in S_n, e = (1)(2)(3)...(n) (or empty set if excluding one-cycles like normal).
- **SUPER MEGA FREAKY Proposition:** For all sigma and rho in Sym(X): 1. sigma e = e sigma = sigma _(identity element)_ 2. sigma rho in Sym(X) _(closure)_ 3. there exists inverse sigma in Sym(X) such that sigma inverse sigma = e = sigma sigma inverse _(inverse element) _**just normal group proving shennanigans**
- **UBER SUPER MEGA FREAKY Proposition:** Let X be a finite set. Every permutation in Sym(X) can be written as a product of disjoint cycles.
- **DIDDY Proposition**: Suppose sigma in SYym(X). We know we can write it as a product of disjoint cycles: sigma = c1 c2 .. cn. Since, the inverse of any cycle (x1 x2 ... xm) is (xm ... x2 x1), then, sigma inverse = c1 inverse c2 inverse ... cn inverse. **Also called the boring ahh "quick inverse theorem", lame**
- The order of g in Sym(X) is the smallest n in Sym(X) that ... (idk I dozed off, probably something to do with inverses)
- 2.1. Groups (recap)
- A group is a set G with an operation * on G such that... 1. **C****losure**: for any two elements, g, h, in the group, g * h in G. 2. ******Identity**: there exists an element e_G in G such that for all g in G, e_G*g=g=g*e_G I WANNA RED BULL SO BADDDDDD NOM NOM NOM NOM I'M TWEAKING 3. **Inverse**: for all g in G there exists g inverse in G such that g*g inverse = e = g inverse * g I wonder if Diddy every went to Epstein's island - nvm alex broke my heart 4. **Associative**: for all g,h,k in G blah blah blah you already know this big boss man
- Notice this allows groups to be written as permutations! Yippee!!
- **Ooooo so important example oooo thinks it's sooooo coool**: If X is a set then Sym(X) is a group, under the multiplication of permutations. RELATED TO KATIE'S THEOREM (KATIE ARNOLD!!!!) actually like cayley problem, that guy did too much
- *yawn* wait I thought we were doing a practical today :'(
- if G & H are two groups then their direct product/cartesian product is a group denoted G x H = {(g,h):g in G, h in H)} & (g1, h1) * (g2, h2) = (g1*g2,h1*h2) omg who'd have thunk it
- WAIT WE ARE IN JUNCTION LATER UGHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHH not a happy bunny
- **Abelian groups **- just commutative innit omg lil bro hurry up with the recap AND WHAT DO YOU MEAN WE HAVEN'T COVERED CYCLIC GROUPS WE DID THAT DONKEY YEARS AGO
- bro accidentally finished, nvm love this guy, just like me fr, hate it when I accidentally finish :( (in alex or dan, sometimes tom when he cums over) must've been the wind
- nevermind bro hit us with **order is number of elements in a group** like no shizzle lil brizzle WAIT AND IT'S DENOTED |G| NEVERMIND SO WORTH COMING TO THIS LECTURE
- "nothing exciting now" yeah no shizzle my drizzle
- PRACTICAL TIME LET'S GOOOOOOO MCDON AND RED BUL

###### Practical time bishes







