# MTH3004: Pedagogy

> [!quote] Rachael Sharpe
> …

## Course Components

- **Portfolio** (100%): essay and poster.

## Learning Outcomes

- [ ] **LO1**: Demonstrate systematic knowledge and understanding of academic theory and practice in secondary physics/mathematics education.
- [ ] **LO2**: Critically describe or discuss the implications of current issues relating to scientific/mathematical literacy in secondary education.
- [ ] **LO3**: Critically discuss the secondary school curriculum in a physics/mathematics classroom.
- [ ] **LO4**: Critically reflect on the secondary school teaching environment.

## Lectures

- [[mth3004 lecture 1]] - questioning understanding
- [[mth3004 lecture 2]] - critical arguments

## Essay (1000 words): What is Effective Teaching in Your Subject?

1. Introduction (250 words)
	1. Definition of effective teaching
	2. Introduce key focus - one area
2. Discussion and analysis (500 words)
	1. Discuss key area supported by literature (IEEE)
	2. Evaluate what is demonstrated
3. Conclusion (250 words)
	1. Summarise and conclude with an answer to the question, supported by literature (IEEE)

## Poster (A1 size): Development of a Topic from Year 7 to 13

> Algebra?

1. Introduction and topic area
	1. Background information
	2. Personal motivation for topic
	3. Literature supported motivation for topic
2. Development and teaching implications
	1. Map out the topic from year 7 to 13 - what is being learned?
	2. What knowledge, understanding, and skills are being developed?
	3. What misconceptions are there?
	4. What learning theories/concepts support the topic?
	5. Link to literature on the topic.
3. Conclusion
	1. Summarise the key implications to support effective teaching and learning in this topic area.
4. Presentation and referencing
	1. Demonstrate a logical structure and clear relationships between sections.
	2. Any references should be included in a reference list at the bottom of the poster.
	3. IEEE referencing - check your referencing guide!
