# Quantum Dots: Applications in Biotechnology

Quantum dots are tiny particles, smaller than 100nm in all 3 dimensions and are so small quantum mechanics fully describes them, to the extent that quantum dots are sometimes called "artificial atoms" because electrons inside them behave like those in an atom. Quantum confinement effects begin to become relevant when the dots are smaller than the exciton Bohr radius.

In 1981, Alexei Ekimov, who was working at the Vavilov State Optical Institute, discovered quantum effects for particles in glass matrices. Later in the same decade, Louis E. Brus obtained similar results at Bell Laboratories for particles in colloid solutions. Moungi G. Bawendi also pioneered in the methods of creating high quality quantum dots, which is a paramount element for practical application. Together, they were awarded the 2023 Nobel Prize in Chemistry.

Quantum dots are used in digital cameras, solar cells, LEDs and TVs, but this seminar focused on their biotechnology related applications, specifically focusing on their photoluminescence properties and in biological imaging. Dr Booth explained that quantum dots are much more stable than organic dyes when being photographed or in applications for a long time. He also pointed out that quantum dots made from toxic materials could cause cytotoxicity and damage surrounding tissue.

Finally, Dr Booth discussed one of the most recent advancements for quantum dot biotechnology; an invisible dye storing vaccination data at the vaccination site.

> [!quote] 92913
> This article gives an excellent brief summary of Dr Matt Booth's seminar on quantum dots and their applications in biotechnology. The article contains a relevant quote from the lecture and some mathematical background on the topic. Also, the history of the discovery of quantum dots, and a relevant Noble prize, is mentioned.
