# Lecture Transcript

Hello, everyone. I'm Havingue, and in this video we're going to have a seminar.

What I'm going to talk about is an enquiry into the packing properties of spheres. So essentially, this is part of one of the subjects I'm interested in—I'm interested in how we arrange spheres together and so on. It looks strange, but let's talk a bit about what this kind of problem could look like.

So here, what I'm going to show is a simulation. This is a simulation box that you see in yellow, and then we have the three coordinate directions: X, Y, and Z. What I'm going to do is basically pour, numerically, ten thousand spheres into this kind of container. So, well, it's going on, right? And it's going to stop soon. Yes, here. And then once you're there, what you can do is define a quantity which is called the packing fraction.

Now, the packing fraction, as the name kind of indicates, is telling you how much the arrangement of spheres that you've got here, for example, is filling space. The N here would be the number of spheres, the lowercase v would be the volume of a sphere, and then V_packing would be the total volume occupied by the packing of spheres in the box. So what that means is this is the volume of a cuboid, essentially—the smallest cuboid that contains the spheres.

Right, so now, because there are interstices between the spheres—they don't fill space—what that means is that eta is always smaller than or equal to one. It can't be larger than one, and it's larger than zero because it's a volume. It's a ratio of two volumes. So for this particular case, for example, that's 0.61541, et cetera.

Okay, now what we can do—because, you know, science is about reproducibility—is to repeat this little animation. So essentially we repeat it, but starting with a different configuration, a different initial configuration. And you see the protocol is basically the same: I'm pouring spheres, but obviously I can't control where the grains initially go, one by one, their initial placement. And so as a consequence, what I get out of it is something that looks similar. I just basically poured these particles in there. I would get 0.61, but then 629 instead of 541. So there is a difference in the actual packing fraction simply by pouring twice the same kind of spheres—ten thousand spheres.

So what we could say is, okay, it varies a little bit. But why should we care about it? Well, if you are a manufacturer and you produce, let's say, sweets of spherical shapes like this one, then you can try to understand—or to predict, rather—what would be the variation, delta, or the imprecision. You could argue delta N, the number of sweets that is poured into a given container. So in the various ways of processing them and transporting them, there would always be stages of pouring and then counting and so on and so forth.

And it turns out, by doing so—and then there is this thing called error propagation—we can find out that delta N, the imprecision in N, is equal to N times the relative imprecision in eta, the packing fraction. So that's delta eta over eta. And so that's approximately N times the absolute value of eta_1 minus eta_2, divided by eta_1. So that's something called, again, error propagation.

Now, if you plug in the values I've put before, what you would find is that if you have a large number of them—like on this picture, for example, N is fifty thousand—then you will have a delta N of seventy-two. So you could say, well, seventy-two, is it... it's quite a bit, right? You could say, well, how many people could fit with this? Well, you might get sick of them all in one go. But in any case, it's not negligible.

But also, I've got a very specific simulation where there is no friction, and there are plenty of things that are idealised in my simulation. If you actually look on that most reliable source of all, which is Wikipedia, you would find that an estimate of this imprecision in the packing fraction—when you pour a given granular material made of spheres—you would find instead that this is 0.035. And if you apply it with this N, which is fifty thousand, then you would get something which is, well, almost 3000 in imprecision. So that can actually do a lot to your manufacturing processes, et cetera, if basically you don't know whether you've got more or less 3000 spheres in your container. That's where it can lead to substantial problems in actual practice.

Now, of course, in my case, I'm more interested in, let's say, more mundane types of issues—which is that, philosophically speaking, the dynamics of the grains is deterministic. And yet we cannot predict eta, the packing fraction, with certainty. The reason why is because we have an uncertainty in the exact initial state of the system. Now, to be honest, that would be one reason—that it's basically totally random for us. But on top of this, even if we were as close as we want to knowing it, the system is also chaotic. So in principle, it would also lead to something which is that we can't replicate anyway. So basically there is a problem here.

And the question mathematically we could ask is: is there any reliable mathematical or physical prediction that we can make on sphere packings at all? So I'm saying that the dynamics and the typical uncertainty when you pour a granular material into a container makes it that basically everything seems totally random and so on. So how do you do it? Can you make reliable predictions? That's basically the question I want to discuss, and one of the questions I'm interested in in my own research.

So let's see here. We've got this particular question here. Mathematically, this is quite appealing—it has to do with finding what is mathematically possible or impossible for a stack of spheres. And here we are going to look at oranges as an example. So you've got these oranges and you're interested in guessing—or finding out, if you want—which is the most effective way of stacking oranges. By that, I mean, which is the densest packing? Would that be putting them randomly, or in a square arrangement, or a cubic arrangement, or in a hexagonal arrangement?

So there would be a quiz happening right now. What did you reply to the quiz?

Regardless of what you replied, it turns out that the mathematical answer for it is that the hexagonal pack would actually work best. And in fact, for 2D—so in two dimensions—we can calculate exactly what they are, the packing fractions. So again, this is the volume of spheres occupied divided by the volume of the cuboid, the smallest cuboid that can contain it. In 2D, it's pi over two times the square root of three. In 3D, that's pi over three times the square root of two. It's kind of swapped, in a way. If you have a square, that's pi over four. And so on.

Now of course, it's a little bit difficult to know which one is really the highest. So let me put the numbers here. So here, that's 0.78. And here is 0.9, right? So it's much bigger—much closer to fully packed and filling space. And likewise here, hexagonal is 0.74. Here, for the square cubic—or simple cubic—that would be 0.52. So you see that, looking at the numbers, in each case the hexagonal arrangement works best.

Now, as you notice, I've put question marks here, and basically I can't tell what they are. But we are going to suspect that these hexagonal arrangements have higher packing fractions than these question marks. Now, it turns out that the history of this subject is quite interesting.

So when it comes to the mathematics of it, the 2D case—that the hexagonal pack was indeed the largest of all packings—was proven by Lagrange in the 18th century. Now, the fact that the hexagonal pack was actually the largest in 3D was conjectured by Kepler in 1611. So, 17th century—that's before Lagrange. But now we are in 3D, so it's a bit more complicated. It was conjectured by Kepler, and then it was proved for regular packings by Gauss in the 19th century.

Then there was a proof proposed by exhaustion—that's when you include even random ones and so on—by Hales and Ferguson in 1998. Exhaustion means that you try kind of all possible packs, or for a continuous set of packs... well, actually, there is no continuous set of packs. So you try basically all the packs, and if not trying all of them, you basically managed to organise them so that you know which one is the largest and so on.

Hales and Ferguson were not happy with the fact that they had to use exhaustion. So they proposed a formal proof in 2003. It was then run on an automated proof-checking algorithm over twelve years. And eventually, in 2017, it was finally published—the formal proof of the Kepler conjecture had been done. So you see here, this is a long journey between 1611, where Kepler conjectured that the hexagonal pack was the densest, to actually formally proving it.

So I didn't talk about random packs too much. What we claim in 3D is that close packs are denser than any—and in principle, random packs are less dense than any regular pack. That's what has been shown. Now, the thing here is that we don't know whether there is any maximal value, for example, that could be taken by randomly organised... I mean, sorry, it's a bit strange to put "randomly" and "organised" in the same sentence, but basically, by randomly arranged sphere packings. The thing here is that we don't know how to represent sphere packings that are random, and whether there is any limit to them.

So, for example, here—I didn't explain what this has to do with columns of spheres, and we are going to make the link with the very first videos I showed just now. Here, what I can do is, instead of once I've put the particles in, instead of basically pouring a second time, I can also basically tap it. So I tap the column of grains, and then essentially they have this flow of grains that are going up, et cetera. So I do it a second time, and you see it's almost like magma going up and then falling down. And so on and so forth. I think there is one more time. Yes, I think that would be the last one. Right, so let me check.

Okay. So here what we see is that, again, the values are very close to each other, but we observe a trend here—we go from 5, then 8, then 9. And it turns out that the system appears to densify as we tap on it.

And what happens if we actually do it more systematically? So this is something we've done with an undergraduate student, Charlotte Vade. That was during a UROS project. And that's for different tapping amplitudes—so, how strongly do we tap on the pack of spheres? And what you see is that the stronger you tap on them, the lower they reach a particular density or packing fraction. So the packing fraction here is quite low. And then if you instead tap quite gently, with a small amplitude, then you see it actually densifies more.

Now, it turns out that here we've tried really low amplitudes and large amplitudes, and quite really low ones. So we can't really go much lower. But at least, as you can see on this trend, it doesn't seem that we can go beyond 0.64. So we've got densification occurring, but somehow it seems unable to go above this particular value of 0.64. And what is strange is that this is yet less—and in fact, substantially less—than the 0.74 that we had seen for the densest packs of all.

And so when people realised that experimentally... so that's here, a paper in Nature published by a guy called Scott—that's his surname. What he concluded... so here, this is something that can be interesting as well for anybody interested in modelling and so on. What happens is that when you do experiments or even simulations, you always have a finite system and a finite number—I mean, it's not an infinite system. And as a result, the set of points that were obtained from the experiments were these ones.

But the issue is that, once you want to obtain some form of universal value—you want the values that are universal or theoretical or ideal in some kind of Platonist way—you don't want them to be interfered with by the actual boundaries of the system. And so what people do in that case is that they plot—and that's what you can see here—not in terms of the system size, but in terms of the inverse of the system size. Nothing really special to say, but it's the inverse of the system size.

And what is nice is that, when you then try to extrapolate—you seem to see a straight-line behaviour here—so then this can lead people to assume that this is a straight line all the way through to zero. Now, when you try to extrapolate this curve to zero, then you actually get, when 1/N is zero—which is when the system size is infinite—you can basically get a universally appreciable value. And what he found was this particular value here, which was estimated to be 0.637, which he quantified as being the "random close packing."

And what he said was: "It seems unlikely that there are other stable, random packing arrangements for equal spheres which have packing densities outside these two limits." So there was a lower limit as well, which was that if you are lower than this, then your arrangement of spheres will undergo various kinds of avalanches. But in any case, we're more interested in this upper value here. So they decided that if it's a random pack—and this pack was obtained by tapping on a system of spheres—then you would obtain this maximal value.

Now, experimentally, what people imagined in 2012 was: let's try to put a load on. So they actually had a system with spheres, and they tapped on them. But then they had a mechanism, as you can see on the drawing, where they could also apply a force. Try to think, and maybe try to reply to a little quiz after that: what do you think is going to happen if you compress the system? You apply a load onto a system and you tap it. Is it going to compress the system further, or the other way round? Try to answer as a little quiz in there. That would be nice. So what did you say in the end?

Now, it turns out that when you do the experiment, you observe that... this is still packing fractions. I remind you that this is denser as you increase. So here, what they did was, if it's free, they obtained this usual 0.64 value. But if you actually put a load on it, then the higher the load, the looser the packing actually gets—or it saturates. That's right. And so that's quite counterintuitive, because you would expect the opposite. But now, if you apply force, it's more difficult to compact your system. Higher loads lead to lower end packing fractions. And again, in free volume, we obtain this.

This was actually conjectured geometrically by—I'm not sure how to call it—like a polymath, but "polymath" is maybe even a bit too little. J.D. Bernal was both kind of a mathematician and a physicist and so on, this kind of person. And in 1959, just before Scott, he published a paper where, based on geometrical considerations, he was saying that there is an absolute impossibility of forming a homogeneous assembly of points of volume intermediate between two—so, long-range order and close-packed disorder. And so what he meant here is that basically you can't form an assembly of points which is random and that would be between 0.64 and 0.74 in terms of packing fraction. So essentially he was saying that there is a maximum that random close packing can actually reach. That kind of makes sense.

Now, there are also other people who have claimed that they could explain that there was a universality in obtaining random close packing from some form of compression mechanism. And what was here put forward by one of my former collaborators was whether or not we could consider this particular idea of having a maximum for random packs as being a new kind of Kepler conjecture. So here we had: the maximum value for eta in 3D for regular packs essentially is the hexagonal pack. And effectively, people managed to prove this is also the highest even compared with random packs. However, that does not tell us if there is an upper limit to random packs. And if so, what is that limit? So essentially we are back to some form of new Kepler conjecture.

Now, the issue here is that this is science, and science—whether it's maths-related or physics-related—there are all kinds of ongoing fights that take place. And here, one of the things that people have claimed is that this concept of a maximum for random arrangements of spheres is not well-defined. That's a very legitimate claim to make. So what does it say here? That the words "random" and "disordered" are used too loosely, and the means to quantify disorder is not unique. So what they claim is that, well, the only thing we might talk about—and then we can still do the mathematics, but then we would have one Kepler conjecture per means to quantify disorder—is that we can talk about maximally disordered states with respect to a given order parameter or symmetry group, if you will. And again, that's a legitimate thing to do for a given problem. But then what that means is that universality is kind of lost.

Likewise, experimentally speaking, people observed that, okay, tapping is fine, but then it depends on how you tap. So here there are two lines. What people did was that they tapped on, again, a column of grains, but either by tapping vertically or horizontally, or a combination of both. And what one obtained was that if you tap vertically, then you get—as we found with my students, and as Scott found here as well—this 0.64 limit. So basically you retrieve this random close packing limit. But if you do it horizontally, then you get a random close packing that is not observed at all—you can reach 0.66. And in fact, people have shown that you can go up to 0.74, the same as the hexagonal pack, by doing this. So indeed, it shows that things are not as straightforward as one may think.

So if I want to summarise a bit what's going on here: we've got that, in terms of the random case, 0.64 seems to be the maximum obtainable—with some caveats—but the maximum obtainable in various situations and scenarios. And that's in 3D; in 2D it's similar. Now, this is highly reproducible, not only when tapping but also with various kinds of processes. But sometimes people have found scenarios where it doesn't work.

So the thing here is that considering this as being some maximum limit depends on a few things. The protocol being used—because sometimes you can reach a higher limit. But then it depends, once you agree with the protocol, it depends as well on the order metric you choose to decide whether it's actually a random configuration or not—so basically, whether there is any kind of local symmetries that can be satisfied by spheres. And it depends on the system, in the sense that, for example, depending on how you tap on it, that will matter. It depends on friction and all these things. So you see, it depends on plenty of things. Yet somehow these values come, come, come again. But the point here is to understand kind of why, and people kind of wonder why. And I'm one of these.

So one of the things that put these things together is a paper from 2011 that basically phrases it quite boldly: "Non-universality of density and disorder in jammed sphere packing." So that's kind of one part of the take-home message: that if you look at random or disordered packs, then it's very difficult for people to agree, if you will, on some kind of definition of what they mean, and so on, and then actually go through the mathematics of what's going on. So that's one of the first issues. And also, experimentally, although people do retrieve these values in some sense very easily, at the same time it's equally easy to deviate from them. So it's really, in some sense, a complicated problem.

Now, the thing here is that one way that people have also looked at it—and one of the ways I've looked at it myself—is not looking at randomness in terms of the disorder aspect of the packs, of how you pack together these spheres, but rather to look at randomness in its initial, kind of understood sense or meaning in mathematics, which is with probabilities. So something is random if you can physically associate a random variable to it and have a corresponding probability distribution for it. And that's the kind of thing that we can also address this problem with.

And so in this particular case: can we predict or say anything about the probabilities of obtaining, for example, certain packing fractions or certain arrangements of spheres and so on? And in this particular case, I'm just going to present some things that I have found in my research and the kind of things that it has led to. I don't have the time to go into all the details. If you would want to know a little bit more, then I can, of course, do that during the Q&A session.

So one of the things that we did with a collaborator was to look into a property called ergodicity in granular materials. Now, ergodicity says, roughly speaking—although it's not quite as straightforward as this—but if you take a die and you throw the die many, many times, and you look at the frequency of obtaining a particular outcome from the die, then basically that will be the same frequency you will observe if you were to throw a bunch of dice many times, but at the same time. So it's roughly what that means—comparing so-called time-averaged statistics versus ensemble statistics.

And although for a die, that could matter—and in fact, it does matter for a die, because eventually your die, when you try to throw it many, many times, it accumulates wear, and then essentially the probabilities change. As you do that, eventually you end up with a sphere. So it does matter. And what we found, at least when we applied some of these things to granular matter, to tapped columns of granular matter, was that these two things do not necessarily agree. So what we were able to pin down was that, well, depending on which statistics you look at, you actually reach different conclusions and outcomes. And obviously, that's a big issue when you want to formulate a theory, for example, or a conjecture about which kind of probabilities should appear depending on some protocol and so on.

So we highlighted this. And I think we were the first, in fact, to put forward that we need to be careful about which kind of statistics we're looking at when we want to confront them to theory. And what we showed is that there is some kind of critical limit—a critical strength of tapping—where, below it, there is disagreement between time-averaged statistics and ensemble statistics, collection statistics. But somehow, above this critical threshold, then they seem to agree. So I thought it was quite nice, and it corresponds as well—and that's what we showed—to things related to the relaxation process and mechanical properties of the system. So that's one of the things that we looked at. And again, that was about probabilities of having some packing fraction.

Now, one of the things we looked at as well was to try to define and develop tools to measure the entropy of granular materials. And so here, entropy would be interpreted as being: if you've got a given box, you try to find out the total number of arrangements that you can have in this particular box. And here as well, we calculated it depending on protocols to find them. And this is basically a counting exercise, but it's a very difficult one. And eventually we managed. So that ended up in this particular publication.

And what is nice is that my colleagues kind of continued that one—I went on to other pastures, if you will. And what they found, published in Nature Physics in 2017, was that essentially, in the first paper we published, we had two different entropies that didn't agree because they corresponded to two different protocols. And somehow it seems that these two entropies that depend on protocol eventually reach an agreement—they coincide and get the same value exactly at the same point. And the same point here turns out to be this random close packing, which is 0.64. And on top of this, not only do they converge, they also reach a maximum at that point as well.

And so here, for example, instead of saying that we've got disorder, what we are saying is this interpretation would say that random close packing is, in fact, a maximum of entropy associated to packing fraction. So essentially, we're saying this is the statistically most probable one. And this is universal according to these particular findings.

So here I'm going to stop and simply summarise this with a chart. What is it that we can say about sphere packings of equal spheres? If you varied the size, you're already gone and it doesn't work—it's much more complicated then. So what can we say for certain about sphere packing?

Well, there's certain here and no clue there. One thing that we know and we are certain about is that, as far as we are in Euclidean space, the densest structures in 2D and 3D are hexagonal. Now, to be honest, when it comes to higher dimensions, it's not sure that in high dimensions random structures are actually not denser than organised ones. So this I cannot tell. But in 2D and 3D, yes, it has been proved—and in fact, very recently.

Now, when it comes to the densest packing value for vertically tapped columns, it seems to be fairly certain—not always, as there is this idea that you simply need to wait for a very, very, very long time, and eventually you might see things densify further than the limit of 0.64 for the packing fraction. But people are not sure—this is just a hypothesis.

Now, the densest random packing—it's much less clear, in particular for the reasons I've mentioned, which is that it would depend how you define "random." So at this stage, what I'm saying is that there is strong disagreement about this particular item. And then here, one of the things that we've shown is that different statistics agree: yes, sometimes; and no, some other times. And basically, as usual, it's a complicated matter.

So I'm going to finish on this. And if you have any questions, feel free to note them on a piece of paper, then ask them when the time calls for it.
